---
title: "Change the Conversation"
date: 2014-01-28
categories: 
  - "sensemaking"
---

I've never been much of a talker. As much as I enjoy rich, far-ranging conversations, at heart I'm a quiet recluse who prefers silence to chit-chat. Dialogue is great and necessary, but there is a point where talk must translate into action.

Looking back on the content I've read over the past year, a good portion of it is commentary about some problem or situation that needs to change, but there's little indication that any action will follow to bring about change. Twitter often feels like writing on the water — as soon as ideas are broadcast (critiques, praise, and everything in between), they either ripple outward or vanish downstream. Blog posts have a sedimentary quality, as new or recycled material settles on top of old, day after day. And while books and journal articles are great, at the end of the day they're just static knowledge containers. These days, it feels like the only call to action is to consume more content or struggle to keep up with it. What is all of that content _for_?

As I suggested in my last post, information design is _drowning_ in chatter. There is so much discussion about infographics, data displays, and dazzling visualizations that the hard work of defining and giving more structure to information design as a formal discipline is being neglected. In my own blog, I acknowledge that there's a considerable gap between what I say and what I actually do. I complain about the state of information design and visualization repeatedly — where there's confusion, what challenges exist, what could be done better — but I recognize I've done little to change the situation beyond helping clients understand the full value of information design. Some soon-to-be-launched ventures will help me practice what I preach and catapult some words and ideas into reality.

The Web is an amazing platform for self-expression, idea exchange, and knowledge sharing, but it's up to us to step away from our computers, put down our devices, and engage in the world. We need to get better at applying all the knowledge we absorb and all tools at our disposal towards finding and creating solutions to the problems that sorely need attention.

I want 2014 to be the year where we spend a little less time "curating conversations" from the comfort of our computer screens and more time getting our hands dirty in the messy, unglamorous work of sensemaking. Not all of that work will be tweet-able, "like"-able, or Instagram-able, but it _will_ matter, however big or small the effort is.

### 5 Information Design & Visualization Action Areas for 2014

1. **Mapping Context:** The understanding domain, which encompasses the language, people, practices, scholarship, literature, and other components of information design and visualization, is constantly evolving, but it's still very difficult to see the map of this territory. Some may think that it's futile to define boundaries and set definitions because of that perpetual flux, but without even a conceptual representation of a space that is occupied and shaped by so many different fields and perspectives, there can be no understanding among the people and groups that call that place home, nor can newcomers and "outsiders" get their bearings. Maybe once we have a sense of what we all mean by information design and visualization and start to mean the _same fundamental thing_, we can better contextualize what we do for others in _their_ terms and collectively help make sense of the world.

2. **Making Connections:** Richard Saul Wurman says that you only learn something in relation to what you already know (in a talk he gave many years ago in NYC, he described his personal frustration with the unfamiliar: "How can I put some velcro on this shit?"). I think we all could do a better job of forging connections between the familiar and the unfamiliar, instead of constantly pursuing the "new" and "different" under the guise of trendiness or "innovation." That means doing more to help people understand what we all do, whether we're data visualization people, news infographics people, wayfinding people, information architects, etc. How many of us have a crisp, clear, one-sentence description of our work that many people can understand and _relate_ to?  In our daily work, that means reducing the scale and apparent complexity of the unfamiliar into human terms. One great example of this I found recently is the [Dictionary of Numbers](http://www.dictionaryofnumbers.com/), which makes obscure numbers more concrete and tangible. The potential for this type of tool is immense.

3. **Expanding Community:** There are many different, highly specialized communities within information design and visualization, but they don't seem to talk much to one another. Maybe it's me and my lack of history or possibly limited view of things, but I still don't understand the divisions between, say, information design and information architecture communities, or information design and data visualization communities. When I peer into each little "world" encapsulated in their respective community organization sites and Twitter conversations, I see vibrant discussion and the occasional mention of a neighboring field or overlapping community, but I don't often see deliberate efforts to bridge across to those neighbors and expand communities (unless you consider open calls to participate in conferences with broad categories or comment fields on blog posts active invitations). We all can be territorial for a variety of reasons, and the thought of extending a hand of fellowship towards foreign "tribes" may seem uncomfortable to some, but related to the first two points above, the benefits far outweigh the drawbacks. [HelpMeViz](http://helpmeviz.com/) is among the most promising communities I've seen recently that doesn't simply celebrate shared interest in data visualization — it welcomes productive discussion around data visualization projects needing input. More physical and online platforms for teaching and guidance in this still fuzzy domain are sorely needed.

4. **Considering Consequences:** One of the biggest ongoing problems affecting the perception and understanding of information design and visualization is the glut of (mostly bad) "infographics" and their sensationalistic promotion. It's old news that marketing and graphic design have misappropriated the form and function of visual information displays to suit aesthetic and commercial interests, but the consequence is that information design and visualization are becoming too closely and too narrowly associated with empty, unintelligible, and irrelevant illustrations of facts and figures and artistic or technical experiments that serve only their creators. The reality is that those more expressive outputs won't go away. Some argue that they are necessary elements or "disruptors" of the larger visualization ecosystem. Still, there still needs to be a clearer delineation between what is _playful_ and what is _serious_. I would go so far as to distinguish what is _fake_ from what is _real_. Information design and visualization, at their core, deal with enabling understanding and informing action, and we need to recognize work that serves that purpose — in both practical and meaningful ways. And we need to emphasize that information design and visualization span _far more challenges_ than just making pictures of data and _far more outputs and outcomes_ than infographics and data visualization alone, contrary to what blogs and magazine sites may say. We have more than enough "infographics" that leave us thinking "so what?" or "huh?". It's time to show that information design and visualization can — and do — make a real difference in the world.

5. **Championing Clarity:** It's a simple point, but one that is easily forgotten: we all can and should do more to make life easier for ourselves and others in the ways we interact and communicate with each other. Being a practitioner of any sort in information design and visualization should mean that an understanding sensibility is "always on" and a part of everyday life — not just when a project or client demands it. Let's speak in a way that everyone can understand, and not assume others share our same lexicon. Let's listen and take time to truly understand what others say and express, so we can respond in meaningful ways. Let's slow down and cross one understanding challenge at a time, instead of jumping to conclusions about what a solution or answer should be. Let's start simple when we're explaining something, visually, verbally or both, so we don't leave anyone behind. And let's share our skill and expertise to help others, even in small ways, make clarity a habit.

It's already the end of January, and there's lots of work to be done. I hope to see more positive, constructive effort in 2014, as well as some fresh ideas and approaches to the areas I've listed. In the meantime, stay tuned for updates...
